# Backside

Cities are expanding and more people than ever live close to an airport. An
airport nearby can be convenient, but there is also a strong disadvantage:
noise. Aircraft are loud, and while modern aircraft are quieter, the amount of
people exposed to aircraft noise has gone up significantly.

Aircraft noise is known to cause stress, annoyance, and sleep disturbance. In
order to determine how many people are affected by aircraft noise, we first need
to investigate when they are affected. Let us consider for example annoyance.
When is the aircraft noise causing annoyance and what is making it so annoying?
We need to find out what factors play a role, and then try to quantify their
contribution, because that gives the possibility to develop aircraft that sound
less annoying, or could cause less sleep disturance.

In order to investigate these aspects, experiments need to be conducted, and
these typically involve people rating sounds of aircraft. In science it is
desirable to have fine control over your experiment in order to reduce errors
due to unwanted influences. While recordings of aircraft could be used, they may
include a lot of unwanted variables. For example, the wind may affect the sound
but you do not know by how much. How reliable will your results then be?

A simulation tool can give a controlled and reproducible output, and therefore
such a tool was developed to simulate the audible sound of aircraft. In order to
evaluate the tool, an experiment was conducted where participants rated how
similar the auralisations were to recordings. The outcome was that the
auralisations did not sound sufficiently similar to the recordings yet, and
improvements are therefore needed before the tool could be used for
investigating aircraft noise impact.

How realistic auralisations sound can depend on many factors, and one factor that is
thought to be important is the impact of atmospheric turbulence on sound
propagation. When you listen to distant aircraft you can hear strong
fluctuations in the loudness. Earlier aircraft sound simulators did not include
this effect. An algorithm that would account for these fluctuations was
developed and implemented in the simulation tool.
